# Your First C Program - *Hello World*

<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/code-line"></script>
<script>CodeLine.initOnPageLoad({toggleBtn: {show: false}, copyBtn: {show: false}})</script>

<link rel="stylesheet" href="/module-content/css/block.css">

## Creating a C Program File

We will now start our work with C. First we need to create a file in the `lab01` directory called `hello.c`. Use `nano` to create and open the file.

C is a **compiled language**. This means that a program on the computer, **a compiler**, is used to convert the file of C code into executable program code that the computer understands.

## *Hello World* Code

Let us look at our *Hello World* code.

> **DO NOT COPY AND PASTE.** You may think this makes you work faster but in the long term it will slow you down as you will have not gained as much understanding. Or maybe you just want to shortcut typing in code. **You need to practice typing in code.** Remember, **patience** and **precision** are key to developing your skills in computing. Take your time and type in the code. When you fix your mistakes you will learn more. As you take your time, you will understand the code more. These help you in the long run and save far more time in the future.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
    printf("Hello, world!\n");
    return 0;
}
```

Let us look at each line of code one at a time and explain what is happening:

- `#include <stdio.h>` asks the C compiler to include the **STanDard Input-Output** library into our code. This allows us to interact with the command line, such as printing to the screen and reading input from the keyboard.
- `int main(int argc, char **argv)` declares the main part of our program, called the **entry point**. This is where the program will start running from.
  - `int main` means the program returns an integer (number) and the bit of code is called is `main`.
  - `int argc` represents the number of parameters/arguments (*ARGument Count*) given to the program. For example, when we used `rm -r` we passed the `-r` argument to the program. We won’t use this until much later in the module.
  - `char **argv` represents the actual arguments as *character* (text) data.
- `printf("Hello, world!\n");` prints `Hello, world!` to the screen. The `\n` part means print a new line.
- `return 0` is the return value from the program. Programs can return error codes which can be useful when a system fails.

## Compiling *Hello World*

Now we have a program, we need to compile it. **Save the file and exit nano**.

We will use GCC to compile our program. GCC used to stand for [GNU](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU_Project) C Compiler, but today means GNU Compiler Collective as GCC can compile more languages than just C. We use `gcc` to compile our program:

```bash
student@ML-RefVm-999999:~/computer-systems/lab01$ gcc hello.c
student@ML-RefVm-999999:~/computer-systems/lab01$ ls
a.out  hello.c
```

Notice that `gcc` has created a new file called `a.out`. This the created executable.

> **My program didn’t compile. Help!**
>
> The first thing to do is check that you’ve typed in everything correctly. Almost all starting errors come from incorrectly entering the code. **Be precise. Be patient. And practice.** Don’t look quickly and assume you have it right. Try to find the problem.
>
> If you are still stuck, ask for help.

## Running Hello World

To run the program we ask the command line to execute it.

```bash
student@ML-RefVm-999999:~/computer-systems/lab01$ ./a.out
Hello, world!
```

`./` just means *execute this file in the current directory*.