# Your Second C Program

<script src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/code-line"></script>
<script>CodeLine.initOnPageLoad({toggleBtn: {show: false}, copyBtn: {show: false}})</script>

<link rel="stylesheet" href="/module-content/css/block.css">

Let us now create a program that asks the user to input their name and prints it. Create the file `name.c` with the following code:

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
    char name[30];
    printf("Enter your name: ");
    scanf("%29s", name);
    printf("Hello, %s!\n", name);
    return 0;
}
```

We have some new code to explore here:

- `char name[30];` declares a variable or area or memory to store `char` (text) data. We have allocated 30 characters of space.
- `scanf("%29s", name);` means we will read from the keyboard. We will read up to 29 characters of data into the `name` area of memory. We can only read 29 as the string of character data must place an *end-of-string* identifier in memory as well.
- `printf("Hello, %s!\n", name);` prints the `Hello <name>!` to the screen. `%s` is a placeholder for a string to be printed here. After the comma, we provide the string (`name`) we want to put there.

> This isn’t a programming module, and you will learn more about programming and what we are doing in a programming module. We won’t really be dealing with user input much in this module.

We can now compile and run our program:

```bash
student@ML-RefVm-999999:~/computer-systems/lab01$ gcc name.c
student@ML-RefVm-999999:~/computer-systems/lab01$ ./a.out
Enter your name: Kevin
Hello, Kevin!
```

## Outputting Data in C

Now let us get to where we where heading in this lab - displaying raw data. C is a language very close to the machine, and so we can get a good understanding of how data is represented via C.

### Bytes

Recall that a byte is just eight bits of data. This means a byte has a maximum value of 255:

| 2^7^ | 2^6^ | 2^5^ | 2^4^ | 2^3^ | 2^2^ | 2^1^ | 2^0^ |
| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| 128  | 64   | 32   | 16   | 8    | 4    | 2    | 1    |

128 + 64 + 32 + 16 + 8 + 4 + 2 + 1 = 255. We can define an 8-bit value in C using the `int8_t` type. The following program, `bytes.c`, demonstrates.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdint.h>

int main(int argc, char **argv)
{
    int8_t x = 0;
    int8_t y = 100;
    int8_t z = 200;
    printf("x = %i\n", x);
    printf("y = %i\n", y);
    printf("z = %i\n", z);
    return 0;
}
```

> `#include <stdint.h>` includes the standard integer library which defines `int8_t`. `char` is provided in C as an 8-bit value. As we will use other datatypes later in this lab which have different sizes we’ve used `int8_t` for consistency.

We are going to print out `0`, `100`, and `200`. The `%i` place holder means print an integer (number). Let us compile and run the program and see what happens:

```bash
student@ML-RefVm-999999:~/computer-systems/lab01$ gcc bytes.c
student@ML-RefVm-999999:~/computer-systems/lab01$ ./a.out
x = 0
y = 100
z = -56
```

OK, what happened with `z`? Remember our discussion on **two’s compliment** in the lecture and how the first bit in a binary number is used to represent if the number is positive or negative. We can actually work out that this has happened. 200 in binary is `1100 1000`:

| 2^7^ | 2^6^ | 2^5^ | 2^4^ | 2^3^ | 2^2^ | 2^1^ | 2^0^ |
| ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| 128  | 64   | 32   | 16   | 8    | 4    | 2    | 1    |
| 1    | 1    | 0    | 0    | 1    | 0    | 0    | 0    |

128 + 64 + 8 = 200.

56 in binary is `0011 1000`. Remember the system of two’s compliment:

1. Flip 0’s to 1’s and 1’s to 0’s.
2. Add 1.

So, for 56:

1. `0011 1000` becomes `1100 0111`.
2. Adding 1 to `1100 0111` gives us `1100 1000`.

> Remember once again, **the computer is dumb**. It did exactly what you told it to do - store 200 in an 8-bit value. It’s not its fault what happens. It just did exactly what it was asked.

#### Signed and Unsigned

If you want to store numbers greater than 127 in an 8-bit value you have to use an **unsigned** integer. This is a `uint8_t` data type -- the `u` at the start representing *unsigned*.

